Smooth pursuit of flicker-defined motion

We examined the pursuit response to stimuli defined by
space-variant flicker of a dense random dot carrier pattern.
On each frame, every element of the pattern could change polarity,
with a probability given by a two-dimensional Gaussian distribution.
A standard distribution produces a circular region of twinkle,
or the signal can be inverted, resulting in a spot of static texture
in a twinkling surround.
In this latter case, the carrier texture could be stationary, or could
move with the twinkle modulator, thereby producing first-order motion
in the region of the spot.  While the twinkle-defined spot produces
a strong sensation of motion, the complementary stimulus defined by
the absence of twinkle does not; when viewed peripherally, it appears to move
in steps even when the generating distribution moves smoothly.
We examined pursuit responses to these stimuli using two techniques:
1) the eye movement correlogram, obtained by cross-correlating eye velocity
with the velocity of a randomly-moving stimulus; and 2) delayed visual
feedback, where transient stabilization of a target can produce spontaneous
oscillations of the eye, with a period empirically observed to vary linearly
with the applied delay.  Both techniques provide an estimate of the internal
processing time, which can be as short as 100 milliseconds for a first-order
target.  Assessed by the correlogram method, the response to flicker-defined
motion is delayed by more than 100 milliseconds, and significantly weaker (especially in the vertical dimension).  When initially presented in the delayed
feedback condition, purely saccadic oscillation is observed.  One subject
eventually developed smooth oscillations (albeit with significant saccadic
intrusions), showing a period-versus-delay slope similar to that observed
for first-order targets.  This result is somewhat surprising, given
that we interpret the slope of the period-versus-delay function
as reflecting the balance between position- and velocity-sensitive
inputs to pursuit.

